---
title: SYPT 2025
permalink: /sypt-2025/
variant: tiptap
description: ""
---
<h2><strong>Problems for the SYPT 2025</strong></h2>
<p>Approved by the IOC on 18 July 2024</p>
<p>Please refer to the <a href="https://www.iypt.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/08/Problems-IYPT-2025-signed.pdf" rel="noreferrer noopener" target="_blank"><u>official and signed pdf</u></a> as
the authoritative source.</p>
<p><strong>1. Invent Yourself</strong>: <strong>Paper Boomerang</strong>
</p>
<p>Make a returning boomerang from a sheet of paper by folding and/or cutting.
Investigate how its motion depends on relevant parameters.</p>
<p><strong>2. Air Muscle</strong>
</p>
<p>Place a balloon inside a cylindrical net (as is sometimes used to wrap
garlic) and inflate it. The net will expand and shorten. Investigate the
properties of such a “muscle”.</p>
<p><strong>3. Lato Lato</strong>
</p>
<p>Attach a ball to each end of a string and connect the center of the string
to a pivot. When the pivot oscillates along the vertical direction, the
balls start to collide and oscillate with increasing amplitude. Investigate
the phenomenon.</p>
<p><strong>4. Climbing Magnets</strong>
</p>
<p>Attach a rod assembled from cylindrical neodymium magnets horizontally
to a vertical ferromagnetic rod. Limit the motion of the magnets to the
vertical direction. When the ferromagnetic rod is spun around its axis
of symmetry, the magnetic rod begins to climb up. Explain this phenomenon
and investigate how the rate of climbing depends on relevant parameters.</p>
<p><strong>5. Dancing Slinky</strong>
</p>
<p>Twist a slinky several times and keep its bottom fixed. After releasing
the top, the slinky starts to “dance” – wave-like phenomenon can be observed
from the side-view. Explain the phenomenon and investigate the parameters
affecting the slinky’s motion.</p>
<p><strong>6. Dripping Faucet</strong>
</p>
<p>A leaky faucet develops interesting dripping patterns, where the time
between drops depends on the water flowrate. Investigate this phenomenon
and study how it depends on relevant parameters.</p>
<p><strong>7. Ruler Cannon</strong>
</p>
<p>Two rulers are tightly held against each other. A round projectile (e.g.
a plastic bottle cap or a ball) is inserted between them close to one of
their ends. When extra force is exerted on the surface of the rulers, the
projectile is ejected at a high speed. Investigate this effect and the
parameters that affect ejection speed.</p>
<p><strong>8. Levitating Fluid</strong>
</p>
<p>When a container partially filled with liquid is oscillated vertically
and air is injected at the bottom of the container, the fluid can “levitate”.
Investigate the phenomenon.</p>
<p><strong>9. Magnetic Assist</strong>
</p>
<p>Attach one or two magnets to a non-magnetic and non-conductive base such
that they attract a magnet suspended from a string. Investigate how the
motion of the moving magnet depends on relevant parameters.</p>
<p><strong>10. Rayleigh–Bénard convection</strong>
</p>
<p>Uniformly and gently heat the bottom of a container containing a suspension
of powder in oil (e.g. mica powder in silicon oil), cell-like structures
may form. Explain and investigate this phenomenon.</p>
<p><strong>11. Spring Hysteresis</strong>
</p>
<p>Connect two identical linear springs symmetrically to a mass in a “V”
shape, and apply an adjustable force to the mass. When this force is varied,
the resulting motion of the mass depends on the history of changes in the
applied force under certain conditions. Investigate this phenomenon.</p>
<p><strong>12. Sound Versus Fire</strong>
</p>
<p>A small flame can be put out by sound. Investigate the parameters of the
flame and characteristics of the sound that determine whether the flame
will be extinguished.</p>
<p><strong>13. Spaghetti Accelerator</strong>
</p>
<p>When a piece of spaghetti is pushed into a bent tube, small debris of
spaghetti may be ejected from the other end of the tube at a surprisingly
high speed. Investigate this phenomenon.</p>
<p><strong>14. Water Bottle Rocket</strong>
</p>
<p>Pump air into a plastic water bottle partially filled with water. Under
certain conditions, the bottle is launched and flies into the air. Investigate
how the acceleration during lift-off depends on relevant parameters.</p>
<p><strong>15. Wailing Bowl</strong>
</p>
<p>When you strike the side of a metal bowl containing some water, you can
hear a characteristic sound. The sound changes when the water in the bowl
is moving. Explain and investigate the phenomenon.</p>
<p><strong>16. Wirtz Pump</strong>
</p>
<p>A Wirtz Pump is a hollow spiral, mounted vertically. It is arranged such
that one end dips below water once per revolution, while the other end
(at the center of the spiral) is connected to a vertical tube. When rotated,
it can be used to pump water to a great height. Explain this phenomenon
and investigate how relevant parameters affect the pumping height.</p>
<p><strong>17. Quantum Fingerprint</strong>
</p>
<p>Shine laser light onto an organic polymer (eg. styrofoam). The scattered
light may have a higher or lower wavelength than the incident light. Explain
the phenomenon and determine what can be concluded about the molecular
structure of the material from the wavelength shift.</p>
<p><strong><em>Authors:&nbsp;</em></strong><em>Jim Chen, Nikita Chernikov, Falk Ebert, Sam Edgecombe, Łukasz Gładczuk, Xu Kangyou, Martin Koh, Filip Landek, Ilya Martchenko, Christopher Ong, Julian Ronacher, Boris Vavrik, Radost Waszkiewicz, Arthur Wittwer</em>
</p>
<p><strong><em>Problem Selection Committee:&nbsp;</em></strong><em>John Balcombe, Samuel Byland, Ryan Hsiao-Tzu Lin</em>
</p>
<p><strong><em>Special Thanks:&nbsp;</em></strong><em>Giorgi Bakhtadze, Sam Edgecombe, Łukasz Gładczuk, Giorgi Khomeriki, Ilya Martchenko, Michael Steck</em>
</p>